if any of you came here this evening
with the idea of hearing how well we're
all doing in America these days you
might want to leave now because what
Chris Hedges provides in his searing new
book America the farewell tour is a
pretty bleak account of the mess that
we're in just in the first few pages
Chris notes that civilizations over the
past six thousand years have the habit
of eventually squandering their futures
through acts of colossal stupidity and
hubris then he adds we are not an
exception we are entering this final
phase of civilization Chris and
experienced journalists goes on to
detail the evidence of decline and and
growing despair in the opioid crisis
increases in gambling the prevalence of
pornography the spread of magical
thinking the resurgence of hate groups
the explosion of xenophobia and so on he
examines these developments sees the
rise of Donald Trump and his
authoritarian populism as an outgrowth a
natural exploitation of these trends and
issues a passionate call to action to
reverse this disintegration while
there's still time
anyone familiar with Chris's extensive
writing over the years won't be
surprised by the sharpness and
forcefulness of his critique the detail
and broad scope of his reporting and the
many scholarly references woven into the
book for the first two decades or so of
Chris's professional life he reported
overseas as a correspondent covering
conflicts in Central America the Middle
East and the former Yugoslavia much of
that period he spent with the New York
Times and he was part of the team of
times reporters who in 2002 when the
Pulitzer for explanatory reporting for
their stories before and after the 9/11
attacks profiling the global terrorism
Network and the threats had posed for
the past decade chris has been a
columnist for the
Kress of news and commentary website
TruthDig
and he hosts the show on contact on Rt
America a graduate of Harvard Divinity
School Chris was ordained a minister in
the Presbyterian Church four years ago
he's also taught at Princeton and
several other universities and conducts
college credit courses in the New Jersey
prison system plus he's written about a
dozen previous books over the past
decade and a half including his first
war is a force that gives us meaning
which was a finalist for the National
Book Critics Circle Award and six years
ago days of destruction days of revolt
with cartoonist Joe Sacco which was a
best-seller Chris has spoken here
several times before and I'm sure we're
in for a very spirited and provocative
discussion so please join me in
welcoming and back thank you so I'm
gonna speak for about a half hour and
then we'll open it to questions for half
hour
that's the every book that I've written
has a kind of template and for instance
days of destruction days of revolt which
I did with the great cartoonist Joe
Sacco one of the finest journalists in
America and if you have not read
footnotes in Gaza which he spent six
years on it's a masterpiece on the
israel-palestine conflict I knew it was
it was gonna be a rough one to go
through and I got up actually got up
Easter morning before everyone in my
house was awake so that it would be
still and quiet and that book just
reduced me to tears that book was really
modeled on let us now praise famous men
the great work by James Agee and what
are the photographs by Walker Evans this
book my kind of model was Emile
Durkheim's great study of suicide at the
end of the 19th century in France where
Dirk
who was an amazing sociologist very much
like w eb des bois where he would go out
he didn't he didn't remain trapped in
his particular academic Enclave but
really went out and listened and
interviewed that which is of course what
made Dubois such remarkable and
important presence and sociologists
within the United States writing about
african-american african-american
communities and he came to the
conclusion this is where we get the term
anomie that societies that disintegrate
that's societies and decay communities
in decay create diseases of despair
that's not his term that's his idea
pathologies that are expressed that that
that that that rise up from failed
states and those would be self-loathing
a sense of a lack of self-worth
alienation all as Durkheim says that
comes when you no longer have faith or
belief in the established order the
established ideology and established
institutions and and and that that those
kinds of pathologies are expressed in
very self-destructive activities
gambling hate crimes sexual sadism which
is what pornography is and although I
went to the extreme and my book Empire
of illusion I had written about the porn
industry but for this book I went to
kink.com hopefully none of you know what
it is I didn't know what it is
derekjjensen had to tell me what it was
they bought the old National Guard
Armory in San Francisco and run the
largest BDSM operation in the world
which is live-streamed
look Torre it is tortured as clearly I
mean women are waterboarded and stuff
and then people will be people
can stream in and say what they want
done to the women I mean just appalling
but anyway I went to these classes for
like which were held in the basement of
the armory for Dahms dominate dahm dahm
what do they call them people who are
dominant people who like what do they
call no they're not dominatrix their
their their their dweeby guys who dress
in black and me sitting in the basement
I was not dressed in black and I
actually wrote the gambling chapter out
of the Trump Taj Mahal before I even
knew Trump was even go to announce which
was inappropriate decay I mean there was
mice all over the place the lights were
burned out and people were shooting up
in the elevators and most of the Taj
Mahal was mothballed it gets a nice
picture of what's gonna happen to the
rest of the country if he remains in
power and then I was with these white
hate groups nights the alt-right proud
boys which of course hate groups or
product of a diseased society the 3% ORS
I was actually at one point at night
around a bonfire with these guys in
upstate New York and I of course living
in mortal fear that someone there would
Google me and at a bathhouse with my
research assistant who was terrified
quite justifiably so and at one point
across the bonfire in the dusk we saw
two or three of these guys pointing at
me that's when like we we got out like
as fast as we actually when we got to
the car she was so frightened she she'd
like crawl down to the floor and and
their counterpart on the left and I've
been very critical as some of you may
know of the black bloc and antifa for
much the same reason I was in these
de-industrialized pockets Anderson
Indiana and one of the things I liked
about as a writer I lie in joy reporting
I I I like it because it when I go out
it often shatters my own assumptions
about what is happening
and it keeps me intellectually honest so
sometimes you know I can go into a
subject and think that I have a great
body of knowledge I wrote a book on the
Christian Right which has become
unfortunately I think fairly relevant to
our particular political situation it's
called American fascists the Christian
Right and the war on America I was
trying to reach out to them and but I
come out of the liberal church my father
was a Presbyterian minister of course as
you heard I'm a graduate of Harvard
Divinity School but I didn't really know
much about the Christian right and I
went in there with all sorts of
assumptions and and and I would say even
stereotypes about the kinds of people
who embrace this form of fundamentalism
which i think is is heretical it's
Christian heresy but I couldn't listen
to these stories of dislocation and pain
sexual domestic abuse struggles with
addictions evictions bankruptcies
without having it break my heart and it
rewrote I rewrote the whole book the
first chapter is called despair and it
drove home to me what despair does and
at the great study of the raw one of the
great studies of the rise of fascism by
fred stern is called the politics of
cultural despair hannah errant in the
origins of totalitarianism holds up
despair again i think going back to
Durkheim
that sense of worthlessness that sense
and it propels people into a kind of
magical thinking I also in the book was
with Preppers and survivalists in Utah
who have a little food in their bunker
and a lot of ammunition but I think that
magical thinking what anthropologists
call it crisis cults is a natural
response to people who are just so
overwhelmed by reality that they can't
cope and when I was in Anderson so
Anderson Indiana used to have most of
the big GM plants
and then Clinton gave the gift of NAFTA
to the American working class and GM
hightailed it down to Monterrey Mexico
where they pay workers without any
benefits or job security $3 an hour so
your union salary of 25 and if you were
a senior level over time you know you
could be making $50 an hour you had
benefits you had a pension plan you you
were medically covered you had you were
in the UAW at job secured Saul vanished
and Anderson went into the kind of
tailspin that many de-industrialized
pockets of the United States went into
with all of the attendant problems
including of course the rise of a casino
like this whole idea of economic
development through gambling I watched
that work try to work in Yugoslavia and
it doesn't come to a good end the idea
that you're going to fill
state revenue shortfalls with gambling I
mean so what was fascinating about
Anderson is that most of these old UAW
workers voted for Bernie Sanders but
when the general election came around
they voted for Trump because they
weren't going to vote for Clinton after
NAFTA they were acutely aware and
perhaps their anger was even greater at
the Democratic Party than the Republican
Party because it was the Democratic
Party that had betrayed them that had
pretended to fight for their interests
and their concerns that continued to use
the feel your pain language of
traditional liberalism but had thrust a
knife in their back and that betrayal is
very dangerous it as it is you know two
Baldwin's when James Baldwin writes
about I'm and one of his essays he
writes about why he thinks
african-american middle-aged men don't
have a midlife crisis the way white
middle-aged men do he said because
african-american men are not prone to
believe in the American Dream given the
the forms of oppression that
mutating our protein and exists
throughout our how to exist and and
having always existed throughout
American history and I think that
there's a certain wisdom in that that
that these of course the highest and I
write about suicide the highest
percentage of people who commit suicide
in this country which is an epidemic are
middle-aged white men people who
realized that in fact the society has
there is no place for them they they
that the American the quote-unquote
American dream was a lie
and so what's happened and and it's been
a process over a few decades is that we
have undergone what John Ralston saw
calls a coup d'etat in slowmotion a
corporate coup d'etat and slow-motion
Sheldon Wolin if you don't know Sheldon
Wolin please read him we just lost him a
couple years ago I did a 3-hour
interview with him right before he died
on YouTube which was very humbling
I had reread all his books I had pages
of notes there wasn't you can watch it
it's it's remarkable intellectual
pyrotechnics there was just nothing that
I couldn't throw at that guy it was
really quite spectacular as we had not
been interviewed in over a decade was
the last interview he gave but his book
democracy incorporated and then his
masterpiece politics and vision are kind
of seminal works and politics and vision
is often considered by political
scientists as one of the great political
books on political philosophy produced
in America and the 20th century and I
think that's not hyperbolic Wallen calls
the system inverted totalitarianism and
that he means that like the late roman
republic you still have the facade you
have the the iconography the language
the institutions of an open society of a
democratic state but internally
corporations have seized all of the
levers of power to render the citizen
impotent
and of course what that does anytime a
cabal seizes power whether it's Minh
Arkell communist fascist corporate is
and redirects all of the systems of
government and institutions towards
their own empowerment and enrichment
then you you you get a form of political
paralysis the political system seizes up
it no longer responds to the rights and
legitimate grievances of the citizenry
and in fact extracts more and more and
more out of a population that is already
under deep distress and of course that
is what has happened and that's one of
the reasons why it's important to get
out to places like Indiana or buy right
out of Scranton Pennsylvania where the
city went bankrupt or almost went
bankrupt and they had to sell off all of
their utilities their sewer system this
is not uncommon throughout
de-industrialized centers in the United
States and of course corporations buy it
up and then jack up the prices and these
are gotting the IFRIC it's in the book I
can't remember the average per capita
income per family is like forty thousand
dollars a year or something that's pence
not much and and so you're extracting
more and more and more from a population
that has less and less and less and that
is the process I mean clump Trump sorry
Trump is as of course turbocharged the
kleptocracy but it was there before he
came in and and so what we're facing and
what we're producing and what's ahead of
us is the inevitable collapse of the
American Empire all of the warning signs
that have brought down other empires
throughout history are flashing red
within the American Empire and I'll just
take a few of those off one is the
political paralysis the inability of the
system to address the
the injustice --is the economic
deprivation the loss of rights of the
population and in fact to make it worse
the other of course is something that
even Bernie Sanders doesn't like to talk
about and that is the bloated militarism
and imperialism that is hollowing the
country out from the inside so you have
now 17 years of warfare in the Middle
East there's a term at RF people have
read Alfred McCoy wrote a good book I
think it's called this American Century
is a great historian but he talks about
what he calls micro militarism it's a
term that historians use and what it is
is that late empires inevitably
overreach they carry out acts of
military folly in an effort to recapture
a lost power so for instance the in the
Athenian Empire they invade Sicily their
entire fleet is sunk thousands of
soldiers are killed and the Empire
unravels their revolts throughout the
empire or you look at the slow decline
of the British Empire which really began
at the end of World War one
but culminated in 1956 when Nasser
nationalizes the Suez Canal and the
British invade attempt to invade and and
going back to socco's book the Israelis
take over Gaza for a hundred days and
carry out wholesale massacres which is
what his book is about footnotes in Gaza
and and they have an Eisenhower and will
not support them largely because he
won't give them credit to carry out this
act of military adventurism and they
retreat in humiliation and then what
happens is the pound sterling is dropped
as the world's reserve currency and that
of course is the deathblow of the
american empire which is going to happen
one day the the once the dollar is no
longer the reserve currency the the
economy seizes up imports become
phenomenally expensive we can't live off
of the sale of Treasury bonds and
because nobody wants them
and you can look at what happened to the
British economy in the 50s if you want
to know what's coming and so you have a
situation where you're squeezing your
population harder and harder and harder
for less and less and less and and this
is a characteristic with Joseph Tainter
writes about it in his great study the
collapse of complex societies where he
looks at I think it's 24 different
civilizations but he talks about that
final moment when the elites retreat to
the equivalent of the Forbidden City or
Versailles or in our country it's what a
writer in The New Yorker called richest
Stan which means you fly on private jets
and you never have any contact at all
with anybody who doesn't make a few
million dollars ear and and so they have
no connection with the reality and they
squeeze in this case of course it's
through debt peonage you know they
borrowed all these banks all goldman
sachs which is a criminal organization
goldman sachs all of these corporations
were able to borrow from the Fed
trillions of dollars I mean there's
various numbers for seven and at
virtually zero percent interest but it
does have to be paid back and so how is
it paid back it's it's extracted from us
that's 1.4 trillion dollars in student
debt that is you're late on your credit
card it's 28% that is you know even if
you have health insurance as anyone who
has it can tell you the costs keep
rising astronomically in terms of copay
what they don't cover what the the
pharmaceutical industry which can jack
up our you know the mile on but that's
just one of many examples in the in the
EpiPen so so you're extracting more and
more from a population and how do you
how do you deal with this kind of
calcification or failed
see and that is that at the same time
you strip citizens of their rights you
you reinterpret constitutional rights
you overturn them by judicial Fiat so
for instance with Citizens United which
allows the Koch brothers to control with
dark money or Sheldon Adelson these
figures are elections it becomes the
right to petition the government or a
form of free speech this is this is how
citizens united is justified Edward
Snowden exposes the fact that we are the
most surveilled watched monitored
eavesdropped population in human history
and I covered the Stasi state in East
Germany and of course nothing is done to
restore the constitutional right of
privacy and if you wonder why it's so
dangerous that they have everything on
every one of us including medical
records you go back to Hannah Arendt's
great book origins of totalitarianism
and she writes about how despotic
governments take information or have
files information on every citizen so
that at the moment that they seek to
criminalize that person or a group they
can twist whatever information they have
to justify it as a crime we also have
courtesy of Barack Obama's signing of
the 2011 National Defense Authorization
Act section 1021 which overturns the
1878 Posse Comitatus Act which had
before prohibited the military from
acting as a domestic police force and as
some of you may know I sued Obama in
federal court and to the chagrin of the
national security state one and the very
courageous judge Katherine Forrest
ruled in our favor and issued a
temporary injunction and I within hours
of that injunction lawyers from the NSA
and had flown up and demanded in the
name of national security that she
reinstate this act now this act allows
the military to seize US citizens
stripped them of due process and hold
them indefinitely in military facilities
and in her opinion which is worth
reading she said this opens the path for
the government to criminalize an entire
group of people and she cites the
110,000 japanese-americans who were
interned in World War two
you militarized police forces and you
create legal and physical mechanisms
among demon ah the demonized segments of
your population so that at a moment that
the country becomes restive with a flick
of a switch
you can impose martial law or tyranny
so in marginal communities you have
already reins of terror 94% of the
people in our prison system never get a
jury trial they're forced to plea out
and I have taught her in prison for 10
years and my the students I have with
the longest sentences invariably went to
trial did not commit the crime for which
they are charged went to trial though
many people who are forced to plea
guilty didn't commit the crime and
nobody deserves almost no one in the
system deserves the length of sentences
or the conditions they're held under and
and they get the longest sentences
because it has is a message sent to
everyone else which is basically don't
try this I mean they won't peel off the
the charges and that's how a plea works
they stack all sorts of try and they
know you didn't do it I mean they love
to put kidnapping on no matter what you
did because it's 25 years so and and it
will go back to Aaron so Aaron writes
about she herself is expelled from
Germany strip diverse German citizenship
find yourself in France and
writes about the plight of the stateless
and she said once you create a mechanism
within your society whereby for a
segment of that society rights become
privileges and we see it with what's
happening to undocumented people around
us then you have the infrastructure and
the legal tools so that those privileges
can be taken away from everyone and
let's be very clear just to conclude
that these corporate our corporate
masters will stop at nothing if they
feel that their profits are being
impeded and the great example of that
and I was out there as standing rock so
here you had a nonviolent protest by
water protectors to safeguard their own
not only their water but their land and
the response of the state this was under
Obama was incredible incredibly violent
so over 700 arrests the use of attack
dogs we're all talking about nonviolent
protesters sub-freezing temperatures
you're using water cannons laced with
pepper spray against people constant
infiltration and this is something that
I keep telling the kids who I loved in
Zuccotti they weren't quite aware of the
extent to which the state is able to
monitor and infiltrate although there
were moments in Zuccotti when it was out
of a Doonesbury cartoon because some guy
who clearly lifted weights and was in
his 30s would show up in a baseball cap
and and tell everyone he was at Reed
College but he forgot his ID card and
the question was always the same after a
few a little chitchat he goes so who are
the leaders that was all with him and I
mean the great the power of occupy was
that everything was transparent we're
not going to win this game unless we're
transparent and it gets the whole issue
if somebody wanted to ask about it about
non-violence which is the only way we're
going to win
this game and so I remember one of these
cops went to the head of the medical it
was a medical tent in there and said to
the woman running in the medical tent so
eventually came us so who are the
leaders and she goes I am he goes oh
really he goes well what's your title
she goes god but what's not funny is
that because these activists were using
electronic media but you know digital
communication they knew who was
important and after the under Obama
coordinated national effort they shut
down
occupy which for me was one of the great
tragedies of our time because if the
state had responded rationally to the
very moderate demands of the Occupy
movement forgiving student debt
universal health care a jobs program
especially targeted people under the age
of 25 it would have actually gone a long
way to ameliorating the pressure which
has now only gotten worse
but unfortunately the state did not
respond rationally and I know I'm a
little over but just let me close by
talking about Trump Trump is the symptom
he's not the disease and I watched this
same kind of political deformity and
deterioration in Yugoslavia and you can
go back and look at vimar Eric vogelin
writes about it in the in Hitler and the
Germans where he talks about how you
know this idea that Hitler mesmerised or
hypnotizes ridiculous what it tapped
into was a kind of in Kohei rage and
frustration and sense of betrayal
because after the 1929 crash the
socialist government the
social-democrats under Ebert in Vai Mar
imposed the same kinds of programs of
austerity that were pushed on him by the
banks so they even suspended if you can
believe it unemployment insurance people
could even get unemployment insurance
and that Nazis were in twenty eight were
polling in the single digits after the
crash of course and and the policy of
austerity and I and then it gets into
the whole we can go back to Rosa
Luxemburg on the fry Corps and all that
but the they they people embraced these
figures who were everybody knew they
were buffoonish in the same way that
everyone knows Trump is buffoonish as
the same way that everybody knew Radovan
Karadzic are slobodan milosevic our
friend your twos men were buffoonish
because they because of the anger at the
system and my fear as I watched the
Democratic Party and the mainstream
commercial media is that they don't get
it they continue to play this reality
show game did Russia try and interfere
that well yeah probably but Trump is not
a product of of Russian interference
Trump is a product of grotesque social
inequality and of course the Democratic
Party doesn't want to address that issue
because they are an appendage of
corporate power yes they're not the they
are in the spectrum of corporate power
that doesn't want to be identified as a
racist or xenophobe or a homophobe but
they do nothing to halt the
cannibalization
of corporations Nord and and of course
that a part of that is the wars that we
are waging it makes no sense to remain
with the Taliban now controls more
territory in Afghanistan they did than
they did when we went in so why are we
still there well I mean look at the
stock prices of Raytheon Halliburton you
know cruise missile costs what 1.1
million dollars let's drop 50 of them on
Libya it's it's good for money it's good
for profit for
the war industry but it's not good for
anyone over there and it's certainly not
good for us and then I guess I'll happy
to take any any questions anyone else
[Applause]
and I agree with you for the most part
it's very depressing and you didn't even
mention climate you know I didn't it's
in the book
that's the pick-me-up chapter but I
think I'm older than you and yes you
know the empires have collapsed but this
happened very quickly I mean within the
scope of my lifetime I was born in the
40s I grew up in the 50s in
Massachusetts and the country was on a
roll
not everyone not not the blacks in the
south we didn't know about well I didn't
know about it but the people who were
left had gotten through the depression
they had gotten through the war they had
been led by Roosevelt and we felt that
progress was just inevitable and in the
60s because the country was doing so
well
it seemed okay to open things up my late
husband was at the EEOC the whole idea
was to be more inclusive and it all sort
of began to turn in 1980 or in the 70s
with Nixon in 1980 with Ronald Reagan
and Milton Friedman which gave you this
corporate culture but it's happened so
fast that I don't see why it can't still
be turned around okay
I mean it's a good question it started
actually earlier because it started with
I mean you had the collapse of
capitalism in the 1930s right Roosevelt
was a product of the radical movements
the Communist Party we've kind of erased
the Communist Party from American
history I'm not a communist but they you
know the whole whole sit-ins that Martin
Luther King used you know Ruskin was
aware of this they'd been be used in the
1920s by the Communist Party would you
and that's why paul robeson or w/e two
boys join the Communist Party because
even the Socialists under Debs were
hostile to African Americans and and so
we Roosevelt astutely understood I mean
Roosevelt said that his greatest
achievement was that he saved capitalism
and he understood that if the private
sector didn't create jobs for American
citizens given the unemployment good job
we better create jobs so he created
twelve minute jobs if if elderly people
are slit early starving and malnourished
in their apartments then we better
create Social Security and the corporate
oligarchs made two fatal mistakes one
they went after the radicals in the they
recreated the red scares of the 1920s in
the 1950s and Shrek err Ellen trekker
has written two very fine books on this
and you forget how pervasive that
purging was and we're not talking about
necessarily Communists we're talking
about anybody with a social conscience
so the FBI was going into high schools
with a list this is in trekkers book
saying him him hurt her out no evidence
nothing and they're blacklisted the the
assault on journalism it's how I have
stone ends up in his basement writing I
have stones weekly the assault on
Hollywood on entertainment so that began
to destroy the the the popular radical
movements which has in points out were
the forces that opened up our democracy
we had a we have a closed system every
time I hear by the deification of the
founding fathers I just want to fall
over I'm these people were racist they
supported the genocide I mean read what
they wrote about eradicating the Indians
Washington was the wealthiest man in the
United States they were misogynist you
know on and on and on and we paid for
with blood we had the bloodiest labor
Wars of any industrialized country so
they went after the radical movements
then they went after the liberal class
and I wrote a book on it called death of
the liberal class where and as Chomsky
points out I told Noam for
the liberal class everything I learned
about the liberal class I learned from
Noam Chomsky so I should have put by
Chris Hedges and Noam Chomsky except I
didn't get his permission to do it as
Chomsky points out the liberal class was
never designed to be the political left
it was designed to be the safety valve
what Karl Popper writes about in the the
enemies of the open society it was
designed to ameliorate to adjust the
system the way Roosevelt did and so they
have Visser ated the liberal
establishment and then we got the great
traitor of liberalism Bill Clinton who
really sold American people down the
river oh and we can just take it off
NAFTA the greatest betrayal of working
men and women since the taft-hartley Act
deregulating the FCC so these
troglodytes from Clear Channel and Fox
News can consolidate control we have
about six corporations are five control
90% of what people listen to and it's
indoctrinated trap talk about it's fake
news I mean real fake news he passes the
94 omnibus crime bill so the prison
population explodes from 700,000 he
destroys glass-steagall he destroys
welfare and 70% of the original
recipients in the old welfare program
were children and every time I heard
Hillary Clinton talk about her concern
for mothers so and Obama went any better
but that's another story
so that the the the we we created this
it was a gradual process and in that
process we D industrialized so as
Charles Mayer the Harvard historian says
by the 1970s we had shifted from an
empire of production to an empire of
consumption meaning that we were
borrowing to maintain both a lifestyle
and a military we could no loan afford
and now we're paying for it that's a
long answer go ahead thank you
I agree with every word that you spoken
tonight mm-hmm
but I want to pick up with what that
lady said at the very end we must not
get defeatist we have to think that
there is a way out of this and
to describe it is very important but we
have to start structuring our thought I
mean for example all of us are many
people are in the system so there excuse
me there is a leverage of people to
change their minds to change the
philosophy and I'd like you to speak a
little bit about that because I don't
want us to get so down that we really
think we can't I mean this this gets to
the whole issue of hope I you know I
come out of war I spent 20 years
covering war i I don't share the
cultures mania for hope
I heard very bleak situations I was in
Sarajevo during the war and my job as a
war correspondent was to make a very
cold rational calculation about the
weapons systems around me and the
possibility for destruction and then to
act and we mentioned she mentioned
climate change which I haven't spoken
about but I mean we've known about
climate change since 1902 and we've done
nothing which kind of implodes the New
Atheists now I can't the Chomsky calls
them the religious fanatics for the
state religion sam harris etc the the it
implodes this idea that we're rational
human beings and I think that you know
Reinhold Niebuhr has her are you inside
no let me are you in such despair
yourself I mean there's not as a
criticism but have you given up so much
hope but I have but but the fact is you
can't use the word hope if you don't
resist
oh but and so we have to we have to
carry out because the very act of
resistance or rebellion at that moment
makes you a free human being but at the
same time it doesn't do us any good not
to grasp the crisis the the the mortal
crisis that we face not only as a nation
but as a species and I think that is the
great existential struggle of the
whereby we we have to see reality for
what it is and then we have to resist
but most people who rebel the great you
know the great rebels Toussaint
L'Ouverture are Sitting Bull or Malcolm
or they they you know but in the eyes of
the world they didn't succeed but in
fact what they did is hold up that other
narrative and I would then go into my
own background as a seminarian I once
asked Daniel Berrigan the great radical
priest and poet how he defined faith and
he said faith is the belief that the
good draws to it the good even if
empirically everyone everything around
us says otherwise and I think that if we
are going to resist successfully we are
going to have to do so in a not in an
orthodox way emma goldman fundamentally
i think had a deep religious impulse we
are going to have to believe as beragon
says that the good draws to it the good
even if empirically everything around us
gets worse but you know Sartre writes
about it the the utopianism of the
practical I can't remember his exact
phrase my son's here you can tell us but
III we are gonna have to see how dire it
is and look I'm not the only one in this
room who has kids and even if we fail we
have to I want my kids to look back and
say he tried so I think on the one hand
we do have to face how bleak it is on
the other hand we can't let that despair
cripple us but I look at this you know
this kind of inevitable human progress
or technology will save us as as foolish
as the denial of global warming thank
you
[Applause]
two quick questions
if Trump for a chance is impeached do
you feel that the backlash could result
in on civil strife and the second
question is you are on RT and I do watch
our tea for time time things I have some
interesting programming but I do feel a
little one-sided
I was wondering what is your experience
with art okay well in terms of Trump
Trump skills go back to Noam Chomsky and
he Trotsky says correctly that if we
lose Trump and get Pence it's gonna be
worse why because and that's why I
mentioned my book on the Christian Right
the the Trump has no ideology it's an
ideological vacuum he doesn't I mean as
far as I can tell he's in the early
stages of dementia and it certainly
appears that way
Ronald Reagan had it but they covered it
up a little better so what he is filling
that vacuum with is the fascist ideology
of the Christian Right and if you think
it's not fascist flick on the TV and
watch Sarah Sanders who lies like the
day is long and then tells you what a
great Christian she is I come back
another time and talk about the
Christian Right but let me just say at
its core it's it's about heat at its
core it's a very frightening movement it
has all the hallmarks of a totalitarian
movement and it is fused the Christian
religion with the state which the German
Christian Church did as far as RT excuse
me uh isn't quite answered the question
the question was if he's in peace will
there be civil strife well yeah but I'm
saying that one it'll be worse and I'm
not sure that there will be civil strife
because they will have pence pence is is
a product of the Christian Right and
while Trump caters to the Christian
Right you have to remember the crib a
have all these institutions they built
Liberty University with its own law
school and its own systems of
indoctrination through cable channels
and so
IIIi don't think there'll be civil
strife because in fact that
Christianized fascism which this segment
of the population yearns for will become
more pronounced in terms of our tea look
if we had a functioning public
broadcasting system
critics of corporate capitalism and
imperialism would have a voice but PBS
in particular is a wholly owned
subsidiary of the Koch brothers and and
and the destruction of public
broadcasting in the 60s you could watch
Baldwin Malcolm
they were all on Zinn Chomsky it's
vanished and so critics such as myself
are being pushed to the margins not only
of the electronic media landscape but
the Internet now they've imposed all
these algorithms in the name of fake
news of course proper not thank you the
Washington Post this anonymous site that
listed us as tools of Russia right for
TruthDig but all of the sites that
reprint my stuff common dreams
counterpunch they've all been targeted
and alternate so you get what they call
impression so before they impose the
algorithms if you typed in imperialism
and I had written an article recently on
imperialism it would come up now it
doesn't now we have we charted it in
truth dig the impressions have fallen in
the last year from over 700,000 to below
200,000 as they perfect the algorithm
alternates traffic has fallen by 63%
world socialist website then we have to
add net neutrality and the question is
why the reason is because nobody is
buying this neoliberal crap this
ideology read David Harvey spoke on
neoliberalism that has just been a kind
of ideological veneer for unadulterated
greed by the 1% was your experience
though well my experience is that they
allow me you know to express these views
remember I covered Eastern Europe so if
you wanted to hear Vaslav Havel the only
place you were gonna hear Havel was
Voice of America Havel didn't support
American imperialism or the US war but
that was the only space that he had
and I'm you know critics such as my
gnomes completely blacked out Nader I
mean these people are just blocked out
and that's the goal and and once we
throw in net neutrality on the goal is
to create tears on the internet so that
these left-wing sites become harder and
harder to access go ahead so with our
mainstream media increasingly
corporatized and spewing out false
narratives with no one speaking up about
the fate of people like Julian Assange
yeah with no one talking about what
Edward Snowden tried to warn us about
and with Google and Yahoo shutting down
websites and d-flat do the platforming
controversial sources every day how can
we possibly extricate ourselves from
this situation without any broad voice I
mean there's there's no kind of well
anything we can turn okay so it's not
like there aren't huge segments of the
population that are conscious I mean you
see the group here tonight there are
people who are conscious and they know
they're being lied to and I you know in
in the start let's go back to the Stasi
state of East Germany or the old Czech
Republic both of which I covered as I
covered the Velvet Revolution so what
was amazing was how conscious people
were even with the imposition of the
iron control of information so when the
Velvet Revolution took place everyone
knew that Havel and you know there's
something about Havel I was in the Magic
Lantern theater with him every night in
Prague the interesting thing about habul
is that he wasn't charismatic he wasn't
a particularly good speaker but they
knew he won gonna sell them out he had
the moral authority oh and and I've told
this story but I'll tell it again there
there is you know and fear will make
people quiet but they know and so that
whole winter there were posters all over
Prague of Yann Pollock who had a charles
university student who to protest the
Soviet invasion had gone to vents less
square lit himself on fire
four days later died of his burns they
his funeral was which attracted hundreds
of people mostly students was never
broadcast by state media or covered his
grave became a shrine they exhumed his
remains cremated his remains gave them
to his mother said she couldn't bury
them that winter his poster was
everywhere when the communist government
fell 10,000 people marched to Red Army
Square and renamed it Yan Pollock square
mark tacuba shaiva the great singer sang
the prayer from our toe the anthem of
defiance that was broadcast on the
airwaves as the Soviet tanks rolled in
after the overthrow of Dubcek in the
imposition of the pro-soviet government
she her recording stock is destroyed
she's banned from the airwaves between
1968 and 1989 she works at an assembly
line at a toy factory
I was invent celeste square she walked
out on the balcony she began to sing the
prayer for Marta and every check in that
crowd knew every word that is the power
of resistance what Auden calls the
ironic point of light that flashes out
wherever the just exchanged the messages
and that's why tyrants and despots
are terrified of the truth because
people see it people feel it and there's
more people out there that yeah I mean
you're right I mean and they are trying
to shut it down but the the lies are now
so egregious and so transparent that you
know a marginal critic such as myself
suddenly becomes a threat because that
truth is a threat and so totalitarian
systems are quite effective at and the
corporate state is quite effective at
controlling the message but I and I just
traveled all over the country for this
book I can tell you people are far more
conscious but with the internet
completely in the power of these
corporations and knowing everything
about us and using it against us
how can we know that wasn't around in in
1969 and this is what we face today how
can we overcome that and and
that parallel your experience you know
as despotic regimes deteriorate they
force resistance to create parallel
systems so I write about Anderson
Indiana where they these old former
Catholic Worker people have bought a
warehouse does the end of the book
chapter freedom and they are literally
because their stories are not told
people trapped in the gig economy they
literally print they print they print it
up and write it and disseminate it I'm
not saying I mean you're right to be
concerned about it
but that doesn't mean they're gonna win
so broad question 2016 was probably the
first time I had been politically
engaged after being in the Army for some
time and being deployed just that's a
whole another world to even explain that
to people that a culture that really
doesn't want the story of what happens
overseas in the name of empire to be
told at all that's right um but where
where does the left go from go from here
um if I find it to be a very sad state
Jill Stein's name has pretty much been
drug through the mud she she can
probably no longer effectively
participate in the political system the
Democratic Party as much as Ocasio
Cortez seems like she'll bring change
she she still has to go up against a
huge apparatus yeah that will silence
her I think where we go where do we go
um we go to the street we look at people
like Standing Rock we look at the all of
the great radical movements that were
shut out of power I mean we've gone
through vicious periods of American
history you know people I was I don't
know if you know James Caan but if you
don't you should read them cross Anna
Lynch and we've just lost him just a
most important theologian in America and
one of the great moral voices of our
time but as James kept saying you know
people will say Malcolm was so radical
Malcolm Malcolm said what he said in
Harlem when King got up and said what he
said in Montgomery it meant that
the next day walking down the street he
could be dead and I think that we have
to uncover or find again with us that
kind of moral courage represented by the
great figures of resistance and we have
to begin what we saw in South Africa
which brought down apartheid which is
non-cooperation we have to do everything
in our power to build alternative
structures to pit power against power
and we have to do everything in our
power to obstruct the workings of the
corporate state and that's what the
Wobblies did that's what the old CIO did
that's what they did in the civil rights
movement that's what the Communist Party
did that's what the Progressive Party
did we have antecedents they erase this
from American history that's what the
bonus marchers did which of course
MacArthur went in and evicted them by
force and you know we have the politics
is a game of fear and we have to make
them frightened of us that's our goal
that's the only way they're kept in
check so there's a passage in
Kissinger's memoirs which hopefully is
not being sold in this bookstore do not
go buy it
it's 1971 tens of thousands of anti-war
protesters around the White House Nixon
has put empty city buses and and around
the White House's barricades and he's
standing at the window looking out
wringing his hands next to Kissinger
going Henry they're going to break
through the barricades and get us it's
our job to make people in power feel
fear that's our job
and until we do that and believe me you
know I so I have relatives who are on
Wall Street and Zuccotti which was
absolutely did not pose any physical
threat to these predators on Wall Street
they were terrified
they wouldn't even go out for lunch they
were getting they had all their private
security firms tweeting or telling them
every hour they're on Bond Street now
they have a giant puppet octopus in
front of Goldman Sachs you know really
you know they're a lot you know you know
why they're so scared because they know
even better than we do
how corrupt and fixed the system is
that's why Bernanke was on his knee
and unfortunately Obama didn't stand up
for us he stood up for the bankers so
that's it that's the only Hubbell we we
didn't talked about climate change I
mean that's why Standing Rock is so
important that's why blocking the
railroad tracks in the North West who
are bringing down the pediment isn't
that's what we got to do that's it and
and and I think they they understand how
hated they are and and that makes them
weak and that's gets into the whole
issue of violence as the great and they
were talking about revolution by the way
I'm talking about the overthrow of the
corporate state and for the homeland
security person who's here that's
overthrow Oh Vee are because these
people are going to kill us and they're
gonna kill my children and and in the
end you know they these corporate forces
have us they have us by the throat and
they have my kids by the throat and I
don't know if we're gonna win I don't
even know if we're gonna survive as a
species but in the end I don't fight
fascism because I win I fight fascists
because they are fascists and that moral
almost religious quality is one that we
have to embrace what Niebuhr called
sublime madness that understanding that
radical evil must be opposed even if
everything around us says that we will
fail and when we find that and when we
have the courage to stand up and defy it
we may not win in an ultimate sense but
we will be free I mean I teach in a
prison they imposed a rule in the prison
that although my students had to walk
past the guards down the corridors with
their eyes down and they refused they
walk down the quarters with their eyes
up it sounds a little but it's not
that's what we have to do and we have to
understand that not the Democratic Party
no but no system now there are no
institutions in this country left that
are authentically democratic there are
no institutions that are going to
protect us or protect our children or
protect the ecosystem on which we depend
for life it's up to us and at least let
us find that courage so that whatever
generation comes after us will say they
were not passive and they were not
complicit as a fundamentalist say say on
prophet I think you mister calling but
that's why I came here tonight was to
get the answer on dealing with despair
and your latest article by the way in
truth peg is about climate change yeah
and you go all the way to the wall
basically implying that no matter what
we do we're gonna lose this battle and
that's um I would like you to do an
article and TruthDig about what you said
tonight because I've never heard you say
all this stuff before so I have said it
before and and I but I think the point
is I mean if we take the climate the
global warming I mean just a factual
understanding I mean even if we stop all
carbon admissions today we are still
going to be dealing with catastrophic
effects of climate change and of course
under the the Trump administration
they're rolling back whatever tea pad
before they have and we don't have any
time left and I think part of it's an
imperative for us to grasp how little
time we have left
I mean climate scientists are quite
clear that once we get below 2% above 2%
Celsius we may get into the kinds of
feedback loops that have that create of
the temperatures on Venus which are 800
degrees that that and it rains sulfuric
acid um that that's where we are and and
there is no serious climate scientist
that disputes that and yet you know I
think I talk about the mania for hope I
think if we understood the emergency
that we're in we might begin to react
but it's of course it fills me I mean my
youngest son will his favorite book is
out of the blue so it's like NARR Wales
and I'm thing
it may very well and probably will be
that in your lifetime everything single
one of those species doesn't exist
that's and I think that when we
understand how precarious our situation
is and stop fooling ourselves we will
react and and it goes back to that
sublime madness I mean that in the end
it is most revolutionaries rebels
throughout history don't succeed but we
have to and and I think that way we
actually overcome despair by resisting I
mean I do I mean I was been a Ritz
boutique a rat never heard that from
that statement from you before I mean
look you know I've been arrested in
front of the White House I've been
arrested in front of goldman sachs and
it that that kind of solid eras rested
with a hundred and thirty three vets in
front of the White House and in the
winter snowing and so as Vietnam vets
Iraqi war vets Afghan vets and it was I
mean it was a religious experience it
was so moving these people knew the
horror of war the poison of militarism
and when it when it came time to walk to
the White House fence and get arrested
it's on YouTube somebody's beating a
drum that's it nobody speaks in fact
most of the people in the crowd are
crying and when you sit home alone when
you attempt as an individual to cope
with the profound despair that we almost
feel it will conquer you but when you
build relationships and not
electronically but the way relationships
can only be built and that is
person-to-person when you build
community and when you carry out acts of
resistance that act of resistance is the
best antidote to despair thank you
we have one more yes I I
okay I actually had a serious question
but it's I realized time is short
basically you never hear anything about
the money system in progressive
discussions and I would love that to be
addressed more not the money system
he'll talk about banks and so on but
it's much more complex than that
but I do want to take this opportunity
to thank you personally I realized as
that progressive about two years ago
that I could no longer continue to kill
and exploit animals for my pleasure
you know you don't get to talk about it
that much but you inspired me to go
vegan and it's it's changed my life
completely so I just say thank you
well let me if you care about climate
change the animal agriculture industry
many people argue is the greatest
contributor to global warming and you
can get up tomorrow and that's something
you can do it's also healthier but that
I mean it was it the environmental
factor that pushed me to become vegan
because whatever I do in my life it's
it's an act it was an easy action to
take and again it it is part of that
assault that we all must carry out
against corporate power and then we get
into a whole issue of how they treat
animals and the and the antibiotics they
pump into them and everything else but
yeah thank you for bringing that up I
think it's an important thing that we
can all do I am in light of your
comments about resisting taking it to
the streets shutting it down I know that
buzzword now is we all need to choose
civility but I just noticed when you
when you began you've made some comments
about the antifa demonstrators and they
didn't sound very positive could you
sort of expand on that a bit well I've
written about it I movement I wrote
about the black bloc and I call them the
cancer of Occupy look the problem with
an Tifa and the black bloc is that in
the name of diversity of tactics they
really only have one tactic
they serve the interests of the state
and the interests of the state is to
demonize the resistance movement make
people afraid of it and in infiltrated
and I would argue that the huge
percentage of these people are cops
infiltrate it and get them to carry out
acts of violence to justify state
repression you want to know who wrote
the best about an anarchist violence is
Lenin he got it he understood how
dangerous that was to the revolution and
look resistance is not a form of
catharsis it's a form it's tactics its
strategic our job is to bring them down
and as the great theorist of revolution
crane Brinton Jeffrey Davies have all
and others have pointed out no
revolution succeeds and this was true in
the revolutions I covered in Eastern
Europe until a significant percentage of
the the security apparatus and the civil
bureaucracy defects because once they
defect it creates paralysis so I was in
East Germany you have demonstrations in
leipzig erich honecker the communist
dictator for 19 years
sends down an elite paratroop division
which is gonna fire on the crowd they
get there the local communist
authorities block it Hahn occurs out of
power within a week that's because these
people no I mean these you know I used
to get in a battle about taunting the
cops in Zuccotti and I remember kind of
flippantly which I shouldn't have done
you know saying to a group in Zuccotti
the people who carried out the most
egregious abuses in Zuccotti were the
white church they were the officers once
the white shirts weren't around the
there was a lot of almost fraternization
between the blue uniformed and the kids
so I in this talk I said look you know
you'll we only have to deal with the
white shirts for a couple of these white
shirt at assholes for a couple hours a
day
these cops have to deal with them all
day long so they've shut down Zuccotti
and I'm giving a talk in New York
and at the end this man comes up to me
and he goes I'm a white shirt at asshole
and I read all of your books now he
might be the only one but I shouldn't
have said that because we will not
succeed unless we bring with us
substantial sections of those within the
power system and look I think they
passed section 1021 of the National
Defense Authorization Act because
ultimately the elites don't trust the
police to protect them and when we in
this two-year legal battle we went
before the it was Obama appealed it to
the Second Circuit the appellate and of
course they were stuck because it's
totally unconstitutional so they don't
want to have to rule on it and they four
months they sit on it sit on it and sit
on it and I was also a plaintiff in
clapper versus Amnesty International
about wholesale surveillance before the
Snowden revelations where government
lawyers got up and said that I and the
other plaintiffs were just speculating
about government surveillance and then
added if the government was monitoring
them we would tell them okay so they
threw it out because we didn't have
standing that's the way they deny our
rights and so then the Second Circuit
said he doesn't have standing he can't
bring the case and we filed a cert but
during that whole to the Supreme Court
they wouldn't take it but during that
two-year battle we went to the
Democratic leadership we went to Pelosi
the lawyers we said look they passed
section 1021 every year
boy if they do is pass it and say it
doesn't apply to u.s. citizens and we
drop the lawsuit but of course they
weren't going to put because it does
apply to u.s. citizens and I forgot your
question and Tifa oh yeah so an Tifa
plays into what they want which is a
militarized states and as I tell look I
was overseas somebody that asked
question was overseas he'll second me
having been around special forces we
have 60,000 of them they're called death
squads
the state has the capacity to inflict
levels of violence that we can't even
begin to imagine and that's just a route
that is utterly self-destructive and so
I have been quite vocal in my attacks
against an T from the Black Bloc because
I see them as counterproductive to what
we're trying to accomplish
[Music]
[Applause]
you